Document guarding build logic under Isolated Projects (#38429)
gradle/gradle: platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/userguide/optimizing-builds/isolated_projects.adoc

----
=====

[[sec:guarding_build_logic]]
==== Guard incompatible build logic as a last resort

> During adoption you may hit build logic that is not yet compatible with Isolated Projects and that you cannot fix right away — for example, a piece of your own plugin, or a third-party plugin that is not essential to every workflow.

Reviewer: 💭  "you may hit build logic" . The meaning is clear, but I'm not sure it's in the writing style of our docs. It reads like an agent response in a chat, not Gradle docs. Just my 2cc

As a last resort, you can _guard_ such logic so that it only runs when Isolated Projects is not active.

[WARNING]
====
Guarding with a conditional is not advised if it is possible to fix the incompatibility instead.
Prefer the refactoring strategies above.
A conditional makes the build behave differently depending on whether Isolated Projects is active, which raises complexity, can hide problems, and can lead to different build results between the two modes.
====

> To detect whether Isolated Projects is active, inject the link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/configuration/BuildFeatures.html[`BuildFeatures`] service and read `isolatedProjects.active`, whose value is always defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To detect whether Isolated Projects is active, inject the link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/configuration/BuildFeatures.html[`BuildFeatures`] service and read `isolatedProjects.active`.
```

> See <<implementing_gradle_plugins_binary.adoc#sec:reacting_to_build_features,Reacting to build features>> for details on this API.

Reviewer: ❓ The link doesn't seem to navigate to the right anchor

[[sec:guard_own_plugin]]
===== Guard logic inside your own plugin

Guard the incompatible part of a plugin with an early return, so the rest of the build is unaffected:

[source,java]
----
include::{snippetsPath}/isolatedProjects/guardingBuildLogic/common/buildSrc/src/main/java/com/example/GuardedConventionPlugin.java[tags=guarded-plugin]
----
<1> Inject the `BuildFeatures` service.

> <2> Check whether Isolated Projects is active; the `active` status is always defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> Check whether Isolated Projects is active; it's safe to call `get()` on `active`, because it's always defined.
```

<3> Skip the incompatible logic when Isolated Projects is active.

[[sec:guard_third_party_plugin]]
===== Guard the application of an incompatible third-party plugin

If a third-party plugin is utterly incompatible with Isolated Projects and is not needed in every workflow, you can guard its _application_ in the same way.
Apply the plugin from a convention plugin rather than from a `plugins {}` block, so that the decision to apply it can be made conditionally:

[source,java]
----
include::{snippetsPath}/isolatedProjects/guardingBuildLogic/common/buildSrc/src/main/java/com/example/ApplierConventionPlugin.java[tags=applier-plugin]
----
<1> Apply the incompatible plugin only when Isolated Projects is not active.

Apply the convention plugin in the projects that need it:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/isolatedProjects/guardingBuildLogic/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=apply]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/isolatedProjects/guardingBuildLogic/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=apply]"]

> ====

Reviewer: 💅 Based on what's rendered in the html, it's not immediately clear what these plugin ids refer to.

Another question is whether it even makes sense to explain something basic like that here. We probably have docs that explain how to apply plugins. Given there is an indirection in going from the class-based plugin definition to its application, I'd avoid making this page even larger to explain it.

[NOTE]
====
Guarding the _application_ of a plugin means the tasks and configuration it contributes are absent when Isolated Projects is active.
Any build logic that depends on that plugin must tolerate its absence, or be guarded as well.
====

[[sec:guarding_for_plugin_authors]]

> ===== A note for plugin authors

Reviewer: 👍
